Comparison of ETC and ETH Monetary Policies (#1196)
ethereumclassic/ethereumclassic.github.io: content/blog/2023-05-16-comparison-of-ethereum-classic-and-ethereum-monetary-policies/index.md

This means that the staking industrial complex will perpetually get richer, creating mega-validators, while the rest of the economy will be constantly starved of money to pay for fees.

While there will alway be some coin to pay for fees, there is a giant constant wealth transfer from the economy to the staking cartel.

## Digital Gold

ETC is digital gold and ETH is not.

ETC is digital gold because it is a proof of work blockchain and the purpose of that consensus mechanism is to make it as costly to create ETC as it is costly to produce gold in the real world.

The way it works is that miners in the blockchain create blocks of transactions and to stamp them cryptographically they need to do a lot of computational work, which uses a lot of electricity. Then, when the blocks are accepted by the rest of the network, the miners are credited newly issued coins by the algorithm.

The above system guarantees that ETC will be sound money as gold was in the old days, hence the term “digital gold”.

> ETH is not digital gold because it is a proof of stake blockchain and validators do not have to do any work to produce blocks or earn rewards. They just receive transactions, package them into batches they call blocks to steal some lure from proof of work blockchains, and they vote on them to affirm their validity.

Reviewer: Line 45: Wording correction
```suggestion
ETH is not digital gold because it is a proof of stake blockchain and validators do not have to do any work to produce blocks or earn rewards. They just receive transactions, package them into batches they call blocks to steal some of the allure of proof of work blockchains, and then vote on them to affirm their validity.
```

The above means that to produce the coin in Ethereum is practically costless, thus the currency cannot be compared to gold.

The best comparison that may be made for ETH is that it is very similar to fiat money. Fiat money is produced by central banks with no cost whatsoever, thus ETH may be called community fiat money as it is printed by a private community rather than a government. 

## Algorithmic

ETC’s monetary policy is algorithmic because in 2017 it migrated to a schedule that is set in stone as it establishes the whole future distribution in the software in the form of a supply algorithm.

The supply algorithm is a set of simple and transparent mathematical rules that establish what number of coins will be paid to miners per block, the frequency of the payments, and a schedule that will decrease these payments as time passes by.

> ETH’s monetary policy is manual, not algorithmic, because it has been changed several times and will likely change many times more in the future given that proof of stake tends to centralization.

Reviewer: Line 57: Usage
```suggestion
ETH’s monetary policy is manual, not algorithmic, because it has been changed several times and will likely change many more times in the future given that proof of stake tends towards centralization.
```

The fact that it has a software algorithm that determines payments to validators does not mean it is algorithmic as long as developers may change the rules whenever they please.

## Capped Supply

ETC has a capped supply of its coin. This means that it’s known what is the total amount of ETC that will ever exist.

Given Ethereum Classic’s frequency of payments to miners, the number of coins it issues per block, and its discount schedule, it will have a maximum supply of ETC of 210,700,000.

ETH does not have a capped supply, but has a two way system with an issuance schedule and a coin burning mechanism. These two combined sometimes produce a net issuance of coins and sometimes a net redemption of coins. It all depends on the amounts of staked ETH by validators and the levels of transaction fees.

> However, whether Ethereum has a capped supply or not , or if they burn coins or not, is inconsequential in a centralized network with a manually managed monetary policy because they may change the rules at any time. 

Reviewer: Line 69: Spacing typo
```suggestion
However, whether Ethereum has a capped supply or not, or if they burn coins or not, is inconsequential in a centralized network with a manually managed monetary policy because they may change the rules at any time. 
```

## Block Time

Ethereum Classic’s block time is 13 seconds per block and Ethereum’s is 12 seconds per slot, and a slot is a space where a block fits.

This means that ETC miners create 6,646 blocks per day and ETH validators create 7,200 blocks in the same period.

The block time of a blockchain is important because it establishes how fast the coins will be created, thus regulates the supply (and the burn rate, in the case of ETH). 

By modulating the block times and the number of coins created (or burned) per block then a blockchain can control the monetary policy in time and supply levels. 

## Eras

Ethereum Classic has eras and Ethereum does not.

Eras in ETC are measured in blocks in which the payments to miners, thus the issuance of coins, will be the same for each era.

Ethereum Classic’s eras last 5 million blocks which, at 13 seconds per block, turns out to be more or less 2 years per era.

After each era ETC discounts the payment to miners.

## Discount Per Era

> In Ethereum Classic, the discount per era is 20%. 

Reviewer: Line 93: Fix line spacing; Rewrite for clarity
```suggestion
In Ethereum Classic, the discount per era is 20%. This means that since the genesis block, ETC has paid miners 5 ETC per block in the first era, then 4 ETC, then 3.20, and is now paying 2.56 per block during the current era.
```

> This means that since genesis, ETC has paid miners 5 ETC per block in the first era, then 4 ETC, then 3.20, and now is paying 2.56 which is the current era.

Reviewer: Line 94: Fix line spacing (moved to end of line 93)
```suggestion

```

Ethereum never had eras, but has manually changed its monetary policy many times.

> Since genesis, ETH has paid miners 5 ETH per block until October of 2017 when they reduced the payment to 3. In February of 2019 they reduced the miner payment to 2 ETH per block. In August of 2021 they implemented EIP-1559 which started the coin burn system in which part of the transaction fees are burned thus reducing supply. And, in September of 2022 they migrated from proof of work to proof of stake where they changed the payment rate to validators to a variable system.

Reviewer: Line 98: Rewrite for clarity
```suggestion
Starting with its genesis block, ETH has paid miners 5 ETH per block until October 2017 when the payment was reduced to 3 ETH. In February 2019, the miner payment was again reduced to 2 ETH per block. Then, in August 2021, with the implementation of EIP-1559, the coin burn system was started in which part of the transaction fees are burned thus reducing supply. Finally, in September 2022, ETH was migrated from proof of work to proof of stake where the payment rate to validators was changed to a variable system.
```
